Ribonuclease A was reacted with [1-13C,1,2-14C]acetaldehyde and sodium cyanoborohydride in the presence or absence of 0.2 M phosphate. After several hours of incubation at 4 degrees C (pH 7.4) stable acetaldehyde-RNase adducts were formed, and the extent of their formation was similar regardless of the presence of phosphate. Although the total amount of covalent binding was comparable in the absence or presence of phosphate, this active site ligand prevented the inhibition of enzymatic activity seen in its absence. This protective action of phosphate diminished with progressive ethylation of RNase, indicating that the reversible association of phosphate with the active site lysyl residue was overcome by the irreversible process of reductive ethylation. Modified RNase was analysed using 13C proton decoupled NMR spectroscopy. Peaks arising from the covalent binding of enriched acetaldehyde to free amino groups in the absence of phosphate were as follows: NH2-terminal alpha amino group, 47.3 ppm; bulk ethylation at epsilon amino groups of nonessential lysyl residues, 43.0 ppm; and the epsilon amino group of lysine-41 at the active site, 47.4 ppm. In the spectrum of RNase ethylated in the presence of phosphate, the peak at 47.4 ppm was absent. When RNase was selectively premethylated in the presence of phosphate, to block all but the active site lysyl residues and then ethylated in its absence, the signal at 43.0 ppm was greatly diminished, and that arising from the active site lysyl residue at 47.4 ppm was enhanced. These results indicate that phosphate specifically protected the active site lysine from reaction with acetaldehyde, and that modification of this lysine by acetaldehyde adduct formation resulted in inhibition of catalytic activity.
Blood ethanol concentrations were measured sequentially, over a period of hours, using a Lion AE-D2 alcolmeter, in 12 healthy male subjects given oral ethanol 0.5 g/kg body wt. Readings were taken before and after rinsing the mouth with water at varying temperatures. Mouth rinsing resulted in a reduction in the alcolmeter readings at all water temperatures tested. The magnitude of the reduction was greater after rinsing with water at lower temperatures. This effect occurs because rinsing cools the mouth and dilutes retained saliva. This finding should be taken into account whenever breath analysis is used to estimate blood ethanol concentrations in experimental situations.
We have tested whether the opioid antagonists naloxone (2 mg/kg), naltrexone (2 mg/kg) and diprenorphine (0.2 mg/kg), and the agonist morphine (4-8 mg/kg) given subcutaneously (10 min before ethanol for 7 days) modify the ethanol withdrawal syndrome (audiogenic seizures) following chronic ethanol intoxication in rats. We found that naloxone, naltrexone and diprenorphine modified the ethanol withdrawal syndrome. These findings do not rule out the possibility of a biochemical link between the action of ethanol and opiates at the level of opioid receptors.
Clinical examination and measurement of MCV and GGT were carried out on 124 self-referred 'healthy' Drinkwatchers, all of whom had consumed at least 80 g alcohol/day for more than 2 years. The majority (66.1%) were in social classes II and III. Sixty-three subjects (54.1%) had a raised MCV, GGT or hepatomegaly. A raised MCV was significantly more likely to occur in men. Forty-five subjects (36.3%) had an enlarged liver of whom 17 had a normal MCV and GGT. This study shows that MCV and GGT are poor screening tests for excessive alcohol consumption in 'healthy' subjects but, if used at all, MCV appears to be more sensitive in women and GGT in men. Neither test is an adequate substitute for a careful history and full clinical examination.
The kinetics of 3H serotonin platelet uptake were studied in alcoholics and former alcoholics to see whether differences found between alcohol-preferring and non-preferring rats could be reproduced in man. Three groups of patients were studied: 10 dependent alcoholics on admission for treatment; 10 dependent alcoholics after 20 days of treatment; 8 former dependent alcoholics, abstinent for 1-11 years. Controls were non-alcoholics, matched for age and sex. The Km for 3H serotonin uptake in platelets was lower in patients from all three groups compared to 15 controls. This phenomenon could be congenital or induced by the previous excessive intake of alcohol. We believe that this increased platelet affinity for serotonin, in the absence of cirrhosis of the liver and/or depression could be a marker for alcohol dependence, enabling the therapeutic effort to be focussed on these patients.
The effects of an i.v. bolus of clonidine (1.5 mg/kg) on withdrawal symptoms were studied in 7 male alcoholics, and compared with 7 normal controls. Clonidine reduced both subjective and objective measures of withdrawal but this only reached significance for scores of depression and muscle tension. In comparison with controls alcoholics in withdrawal showed reduced sedative effects of clonidine.
This paper presents data from a general population survey of three areas of Britain which manifest considerable differences in official rates of problem drinking, yet show similar patterns and levels of alcohol consumption. Consideration of various sources of bias (non-response, forgetting, selective under-reporting, and interviewer) suggest that they do not differentially influence self-reported alcohol consumption in the three areas.
The present study examined correlates of alcohol abuse among university students which have been conceptually linked to the developmental transitions faced by this population. Individual and family developmental theories led to the hypothesis that sex role identity conflict and stresses within the student's family of origin would be positively related to alcohol abuse scores. As expected, an accumulation of family stresses was related to alcohol abuse scores for both men and women. However, for each sex only one of the four sex role conflict variables which were considered was significantly related to alcohol abuse scores. For women, this variable was femininity conflict, while for men it was affiliation conflict.
A group of 33 semi-independent living nonagenarian men and a group of 32 65-75 year-old men of similar demographic characteristics, living at the California Veterans' Home, were compared in terms of alcohol use, past and present, and relationships to several somatic, mental and lifestyle aspects including smoking. The younger group had a higher prevalence of alcohol abuse and higher current alcohol intake (P less than 0.004). Higher alcohol intake related to greater smoking of cigarettes in the younger group. Alcohol tended to be related to an increased number of medical illnesses, and to increased use of major medications (P less than 0.005). There was an interactive effect between classes of alcohol use and scores on a mental status examination used to assess cognitive function (P less than 0.05).
The potentiation of alcuronium by halothane, enflurane and isoflurane was investigated using electromyography. In the first study, cumulative dose-response curves were constructed in four groups of 10 patients anaesthetized with one of the inhalation agents and nitrous oxide, or with fentanyl and droperidol (control). All three agents reduced the ED50 of alcuronium; the effect was marked with isoflurane (P less than 0.005) but less so with halothane (P less than 0.05) and enflurane (ns). In the second part of the investigation, designed primarily to test the duration of action of alcuronium with each agent, a single bolus dose of alcuronium 0.2 mg kg-1 was given to four similar groups (n = 5). The duration of action was significantly prolonged by enflurane (P less than 0.01) and isoflurane (P less than 0.05), but not by halothane. The possible reasons for this are discussed.
